BLT Research -- Lab Report #122 - Edmonton, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 Crop Circle Science 

 

 

 
 

 

 Contact: 

 Nancy Talbott 

P.O. Box 400127

Cambridge, MA 02140 USA

(617) 492-0415 

 

 Report 
 a Crop Circle 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 Printable Version (PDF File) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 BLT 
 Research Team Inc. 

 P.O. Box 400127

 Cambridge, MA 02140 (USA)

 ph: 617/492-0415 

 
 

 

 

 LAB REPORT #122 

 
 
 
 
 CROP FORMATION:

 EDMONTON, ALBERTA, CANADA - 1999 
 
 A 7-circle formation, overall length 
 191 feet, in thistle-infested barley field. Radial lay of crop in 
 all circles w/counter-clockwise perimeter ring underneath top lay. 
 Visible apical node elongation and multiple expulsion cavities in 
 2nd & 3rd nodes. Deep triangular hole found in small, northern circle. 
 Multiple reports of anomalous aerial light phenomena in area at 
 time circles thought to have formed; cell-phone failure occurred 
 inside formation. 

 
 
 
 
 
 Two northernmost circles & center and western circle of Edmonton 

formation. Photo: Rusty Manuel, 9/22/99 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 Triangular hole, about 1 ft. deep, found by field team in center of small,

most northerly circle in formation. Photo: J. Arndt 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 BLT 
 Research Team Inc. 

 P.O. Box 400127

 Cambridge, MA 02140 (USA)

 ph: 617/492-0415 

 
 

 LAB REPORT #122 

 July, 2000

 Pinelandia Biophysical Lab 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 Lab 
 Code: 
 KS-04-176 
 
 
 Event 
 Location: 
 Manuel/Whitman 
 Farm, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 Date 
 Occurred: 
 Around 
 September 14, 1999 
 
 
 Date 
 Discovered: 
 September 
 21, 1999 
 
 
 Date 
 Sampled: 
 September 
 30, October 1-2, 1999 
 
 
 Materials 
 Sampled: 
 Barley 
 ( Hordeum vulgare ) and soils 
 
 
 Sampled 
 By: 
 Judy 
 and Mike Arndt (CCCRN Representatives) 
 
 
 Formation 
 Characteristics: 
 A 
 large (100' diameter) center circle with six adjacent smaller 
 (from 36' to 19' diameter) circles. A counter-clockwise ring 
 of flattened barley, ranging in width from18" around the center 
 circle to 6" around the smallest circle, was found around the 
 edges of all 7 circles, underneath a superimposed layer of radially-laid 
 crop--this in all 7 circles. The uppermost layer of crop contained 
 many partially-downed plants with severely bent nodes, in the 
 range of 40-120 degrees. A triangular "crack" was found in the 
 precise geometric center of the most northerly circle, 6" long 
 to each side, into which a steel bar could be easily inserted 
 up to a depth of 36" (see Figs. 1-4 for details). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fig. 1 : Diagram of Edmonton (1999)

crop formation showing measurements. 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 Fig. 2 : Diagram showing multiple layers of flattened

crop and directions of flow, with field notes. 
 
 
 

 A few strips of plants were 
 laid in the reverse direction of the primary radial lay: these areas 
 are shown as dotted lines in the diagram. 

 

 In the center circle there was a small mound of fresh earth, about 
 12 inches (30 cm) across, which looked as if it had erupted from 
 below. The edges of the fresh earth lay on top of some of the downed 
 crop, indicating that it spilled there after the plants were flattened. 
 The plants swirled around this mini eruption in a semi-circular 
 flow. There were a few more, smaller, mounds of earth in the circles, 
 but we saw no associated variation in the crop lay in these places. 
 In the small northernmost circle a three-way crack and hole in the 
 ground was found at the center of the radially-laid crop. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fig. 3 : Ms. Arndt's diagram illustrating how crop 

was laid in three distinct layers in each of the

7 circles, and her field notes (below). 
 
 

 (a) A concentric ring of flattend 
 crop defines the edge of each circle. Width of this ring in 
 the large center circle is about 18 inches (45 cm); in the 
 smallest circles the ring is about 6 inches (15 cm) wide.

 

 (b) Most of the remaining plants within the rings were flattened 
 radially, from the center out toward the edge, laid straight 
 and close to the soil. These plants were laid over those in 
 the concentric rings. 

 

 (c) The field is heavily infested with Canadian thistle, most 
 of which is flattened hard to the ground along with the barley. 
 Much of it was turning brown and drying out, as if dead. None 
 of the flattened thistle had started to grow back upwards 
 toward the sun. The field was sprayed with Roundup weed-killer 
 on 9/21, about 10 days prior to sampling. 

 

 (d) Some plants (perhaps 10-25% of the barley, but less that 
 1% of the thistle) were left semi- standing, with many severely-kinked 
 stem nodes bent at angles from 40-120 degrees. The standing 
 thistle plants were not obviously deformed and were still 
 green and apparently thriving. A few young thistle plants 
 (about 4 inches tall) grew vigorously in the formation. 

 

 (e) Some wild oats in the field were also left semi-standing, 
 in which we observed many expulsion cavities. 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 Fig. 4 : Diagram and details 
 of triangular hole found in center of small northern circle. 
 
 

 

 In the geometric center of Circle "A" (19 ft. diam., most northerly 
 circle) a triangular crack, filled with loose finely-crumbled soil, 
 was discovered. The firmly-packed surrounding clay appears to be cut 
 away in three flat planes, sloping downward about 30 degrees. Each 
 plane is about 6 in. to a side. Depth of hole measured to 3 ft.

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Actual barley seed-head pulled out of hole, with long "beards" intact, and with dirt in between and adhering to beards.

 Photo: J. Arndt. 
 
 
 When preparing to photograph the hole, fieldworker Judy Arndt 
 discovered a barley plant seed-head which had fallen into (or 
 been sucked into?) the hole, top-down. It was buried to a depth 
 of at least 12 inches. The long "beards" on barley seed-heads 
 not only fan out, they have serrated edges--tiny barbs which 
 normally catch at your skin should you try to rub the beards 
 backward (from the ends toward the base). Such a seed-head would 
 not easily fall, beards first, into a small crack in the ground. 

 

 It appears that this hole must have been at least 2 inches wide, 
 and 12 inches deep, when the seed-head went into the hole. Further, 
 the maturity and freshness of the seed-head indicates that it 
 is the same age (same degree of maturity) as those attached 
 to the flattened plants in the formation, indicating that it 
 became embedded in the hole at the time the circles were created. 
 How this happened, without breaking the fragile "beards," is 
 unknown. 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 Relevant Findings: 

 
 
 Expulsion cavities 
 (holes blown out at the plant stem nodes) were found in 68% 
 of the 71 plant sample sets (approx. 710 plants) taken inside 
 the three sampled circles in this formation; 

 

 
 
 These expulsion cavities were 
 found not only in the apical (first stem node beneath the seed-head) 
 and penultimate (second stem node beneath the seed-head) nodes, 
 but also in the third stem nodes --the first time that this 
 degree of plant damage has been seen in crop formation samples 
 examined in this laboratory (see Fig. 7); 

 

 
 No expulsion cavities (0%) were 
 found in the 23 control plant sets examined (approx. 230 
 plants);

 

 
 Node expansion levels in all 
 of the 71 plant sample sets taken inside the formation were significantly 
 higher (p 
 The highest mean value of plant-stem 
 node expansion (+109%) occurred in the smallest circle (19' diameter) , 
 a situation we have often documented in other formations made 
 up of multiple, variously-sized circles (see Fig. 9);

 

 
 An 8-day germination test disclosed 
 no significant growth differences between the formation and control 
 seedlings ; this absence of an effect on the formation seeds 
 is thought to be due to the fact that the plants in this case 
 were at, or very near, harvest maturity;

 

 
 A minimal increase (0.6-1.3 mg/g-soil) 
 in volume of magnetic particles was found in the formation soils 
 ( the maximum level which can be expected in normal soils is 0.4 
 mg/g-soil);

 

 
 (The radial distribution (45-degree 
 intervals) of magnetic particles in the soil in the large center 
 circle (Circle "C") disclosed an undulating, or crude "wave" type 
 pattern. Since the plant node-expansion levels in this circle 
 were significantly higher than in the controls (due to exposure 
 of the formation plants to the heating component [probably microwaves] 
 of the energy system involved) and were also relatively uniform 
 throughout the circle (no particular pattern of node length increase 
 inside the circle)--and since the volume of magnetic material 
 in the soil was greater than normal (due to strong magnetic fields 
 associated with the causative energy system) but was distributed 
 in a wave-type pattern (see Fig. 10), we again have evidence of 
 a causative mechanism comprised of multiple discreet, and probably 
 interactive, energies. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Results and Discussion: 

 

 Large numbers of sample sets were taken at precise locations in 
 three of the seven circles: Circle "A," a 19'-diameter northerly 
 circle, Circle "B," a 36'-diameter northerly circle, and Circle 
 "C," the large 100'-diameter center circle (see Figs. 5, 6). A 
 total of 71 plant sample-sets (approx. 10 plants/sample or 710 
 plants total) and 23 plant control-sets (approx. 230 plants total) 
 were examined. One control set was highly aberrant and was not 
 included in this analysis. (Click on diagrams below to enlarge) 

 

 

 Fig. 5 : Field sampling diagram for Circle "C" 
 (100 ft.-diam. center circle)

 and Controls #1-16. [KS-04-176]

 

 

 

 Fig. 6 : Field sampling diagram for Circles "A" (19 
 ft.-diam.) and "B" (36 ft.-diam.) and Controls 17 through 24. 
 [KS-04-176] 

 

 The most obvious physical change to the sample plants from inside 
 the three circles was the presence of massive numbers of expulsion 
 cavities at the plant stem nodes--occurring in this formation 
 not only at the apical and penultimate nodes, but also in the 
 third node below the seed-head (see Fig. 7). These expulsion cavities 
 are caused as the moisture inside the plant nodes expands rapidly, 
 due to exposure to very brief bursts of intense heat, causing 
 the inelastic fibers of the older plant stems to burst open at 
 the nodes as the steam escapes. 

 
 
 
 
 
 Fig. 7 : Node-elongation and expulsion cavities in 5 plants from inside the large circle, compared to 5 control plants sampled 75 ft. south of formation. This was one of the first cases in which multiple expulsion cavities were found in a single plant stem, with all--or nearly all--of the nodes affected down to the stem base. 
 
 
 In many crop formations which have occurred in mature crop we 
 have noted similar holes at the apical (first) and to a lesser 
 extent the penultimate (second) nodes; this event is the first 
 in which we have found expulsion cavities all the way down the 
 plant stem to the third node. We also noted that in some of the 
 plant samples which displayed multiple expulsion cavities, the 
 seed-heads were missing (see Fig. 8); we speculate, here, that 
 these seed-heads may have been either weakened by exposure to 
 the energy system responsible for causing the multiple expulsion 
 cavities found in their stems, and subsequently have fallen off, 
 or perhaps were literally "blown" off at the time the formation 
 occurred. 

 
 
 
 
 
 Fig. 8 : (a) Lab photo showing expulsion cavities in first three nodes beneath

seed-head of sample (S-42), from Circle "B." Even the 4th node,

at the base of the plant, is affected. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fig 8: (b) Lab photo showing seed-head from another Circle "B" sample (on left), compared to control (on right). This sample (S-47) was missing seeds and "beards" which had either been blown off stem, or weakened to the point where they fell off after, or while, circle formed. 
 
 
 

 The node length changes found in plant stems in each sampled circle 
 are summarized in Fig. 9, with the percent (%) change relative 
 to the controls indicated above each bar. 

 
 
 
 
 
 Fig. 9 : Apical Node Elongation in Sampled Circles "A" (19' diam.), "B" (36' diam.), and "C" (100' diam. center circle) Compared to Mean Node Length of Controls

(KS-04-176).

[ Note that in this formation, as in several others examined, 

the node-length increase is greatest in the plants from the smallest circle,

and decreases as circle-diameter increases. ] 
 
 
 All three sampled circles disclosed very significant node length 
 increases (from +65% to +109%). It was interesting to find that 
 Circle "A" (the sampled circle with the smallest diameter) had 
 the greatest node expansion, a fact which reflects data from other 
 formations examined in this laboratory over the years. In this 
 smaller-diameter circle the angular momentum, or vorticity, of 
 the plasma vortex would be expected to be much greater than that 
 within either of the larger sampled circles, a fact which is pertinent, 
 later, when discusing the volume of magnetic particles found in 
 the soils. 

 

 In the 100'-diameter center circle (Circle "C") radial samples 
 were taken at 45 degree intervals around the formation; the node 
 length data in Fig. 10(a) shows a relatively uniform distribution 
 of the energy components which produce node expansion. At the 
 same sampling locations in Circle "C," however the soil samples, 
 as seen in Fig. 10(b) below, reveal a distribution of magnetic 
 material that was very non-uniform. The magnetic particle data 
 produces the appearance of an undulating pattern, with maximum 
 deposits of magnetic material at the primary compass directions. 

 
 
 
 
 
 Fig. 10 (a) : Distribution of Node-Length Increases Along Radii of Circle "C" (100'-diameter), Revealing a Relatively Uniform Distribution (KS-04-176). 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 Fig 10 (b) : Distribution of Magnetic Material in Circle "C" (100'-diameter) Soils, 

 Revealing a Rough "wave-like" Pattern (KS-04-176). 

 
 
 
 

 

 The differences in node-length increase and magnetic particle 
 distribution, illustrated above, demonstrate once again that multiple, 
 probably interacting energies are involved in the crop circle creation 
 process. Perhaps what we are seeing here is a resonance-effect 
 between the cloud of magnetic particles in the vortex energy system 
 and the Earth's magnetic field. The uniform distribution of node 
 length changes and the undulating pattern of the magnetic particle 
 distribution, both found in Circle "C," is further evidence that 
 the energies responsible for the node expansions operates entirely 
 independently of the energies distributing the magnetic material. 

 

 An 8-day germination test disclosed no significant growth differences 
 between the seeds from the circle plants and those from the control 
 plants. Since this formation occurred late in the growing season, 
 the seeds were at--or very near--harvest maturity and would, therefore, 
 be less likely to be influenced by the formation energies. 

 

 If, as suggested from the node length data for Circle "A," the 
 energy system responsible for creating this circle was rotating 
 at a much higher angular momentum (as would be expected), then 
 one might expect this circle to contain the minimum volume of 
 magnetic material. We have found in the analyses of many other 
 formations that the distribution of magnetic material (see Fig. 
 11) within and outside a circle vortex area follows the physical 
 principles of centrifugal forces: that is, the smaller-diameter 
 vortices with higher rotational energy deposit the least amount 
 of magnetic material inside the downed-crop area--because it has 
 been "thrown" outside the confines of the visibly-downed region. 

 
 
 
 
 
 Fig. 11 : Photomicrograph (x 100) of Magnetic Material--Both Spherical and

Partially Ablated--Adhering to Soil Chunks (KS-04-176). 

[ Note melted ridge of magnetic material at lower arrow. ] 
 
 
 

 In Table 1 the magnetic drag data from soil samples taken within 
 the three circles and control regions are summarized; as expected, 
 the smallest circle, (Circle "A") contained the least amount of 
 magnetic material of the three circles sampled. 

 
 
 Table 1 : 

 Mean Levels of Magnetic Material in Soils

 In and Around Crop Formation KS-04-176 
 
 
 
 

 Sample Region

 
 
 Controls 
 

 Circle 
 "A" 

 Circle 
 "B" 

 Circle 
 "C" 
 
 
 Magnetic Material

 mg/g-soil

 
 
 0.666 
 mg/g

 0.686 mg/g 

 1.306 mg/g 

 0.729 mg/g 
 
 
 

 % Change

 
 
 -----

 + 3%

 +96%

 +10% 
 
 
 

 The plant and soil abnormalities 
 discovered in the laboratory analyses of this well-documented 
 and carefully sampled crop formation strongly support the presence 
 of a complex, thermodynamically-unstable atmospheric plasma system 
 as a causative agency; in our opinion there is no possibility 
 that this crop event was manually created.

 

 

 
 
 
 W.C. Levengood

 Pinelandia Biophysical Lab 
 
 Nancy Talbott

 Cambridge, MA 
 John 
 A. Burke

 Pro-Seed Technologies 
 
 
 

 Addendum: 
 The field team reported that a local visitor to the formation during 
 the sampling procedure (Sept. 30 - Oct. 1) experienced battery failure 
 of his cell phone while inside the large center circle; he was able 
 later, however, to use the phone after standing outside the formation 
 for about 5 minutes. Additionally, there were reports (by the farmer 
 and his wife and by another driver on the nearby road) of unusual 
 aerial light phenomena over the area where, subsequently, the 7-circle 
 formation was discovered. It should also be noted that multiple, 
 unconnected, circles had been found the previous year (1998) by 
 the farmer's wife while harvesting, but these were not reported. 
 (N.T.) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Help Support the Research with a 

Tax-Deductible Donation 

 
 
 
 [ Home ] [ USA Crop Circle List ] [ Updates ] [ Plant 
 Abnormalities ] [ Magnetic 
 Material in Soils ]

 [ Clay-Mineral XRD Study ]
 [ Van den Broeke Case ] [ Other 
 Facts ] [ Published 
 Papers ] [ Professional Consultants ]

 [ Eyewitness Reports ] [ Field 
 Reports ] [ BLT History ] [ Lab 
 Reports ] [ Research Links ] [ General 
 Links ] [ Contact ] 
 

 

 
 Report a Crop Circle