BLT Research -- Lab Report #79 - Logan, Utah 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Crop Circle Science 

 

 

 
 

 

 Contact: 

 Nancy Talbott 

P.O. Box 400127

Cambridge, MA 02140 USA

(617) 492-0415 

 

 Report 
 a Crop Circle 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Printable Version (PDF File) 

 
 
 
 
 
 BLT 
 Research Team Inc. 

 P.O. Box 400127

 Cambridge, MA 02140 (USA)

 ph: 617/492-0415 

 
 

 

 

 LAB REPORT #79 

 
 
 
 
 CROP FORMATION:

 LOGAN, UTAH - August, 1996 
 
 Formed early in August in barley, this 
 was the first crop formation found in Utah in recent times. Overall 
 length approximately 190 ft., large circle 58 ft.-diameter, smaller 
 circle 30-ft. diameter. Crop lay was more radial than spiral. Small 
 triangular holes were found in the centers of both circles and at 
 end of long path heading South. 

 Light phenomena were observed & photographed (Addendum). 

 Top photo : Mitch Mascaro, The Herald Journal ; bottom 
 photo : Con Olsen. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 BLT 
 Research Team Inc. 

 P.O. Box 400127

 Cambridge, MA 02140 (USA)

 ph: 617/492-0415 

 
 

 LAB REPORT #79 

 March 16, 1997

 Pinelandia Biophysical Lab 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 Lab 
 Code: 
 KS-03-131 
 
 
 
 Event 
 Location: 
 Seth Alder Farm, 
 Logan, Utah 
 
 
 
 Date 
 Occurred: 
 First or second 
 week of August, 1996 
 
 
 
 Date 
 Discovered: 
 August 15, 1996 
 
 
 
 Date 
 Sampled: 
 August 25, 1996 
 
 
 
 Materials 
 Sampled: 
 Barley stems and 
 heads ( Hordeum vulgare ), soils 
 
 
 
 Sampled 
 By: 
 Todd and Lisa Weakland, 
 Ryan Layton 
 
 
 
 Formation 
 Characteristics: 
 Two circles (30.4' 
 and 58' diam.) w/connecting path, additional pathway to the 
 south, & associated triangular pathways around large circle 
 (see Fig. 1). Overall length approximately 190 '. Crop lay 
 was more radial than spiral, and was chaotic in appearance. 
 Three small triangular holes were found: in the center of 
 each circle and at the end of the southern pathway. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 Close-up showing chaotic appearance of crop lay in 30.4'-diam. circle.

Photo taken a few days after discovery, by Con Olsen. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 Ground shot in larger, 58'-diameter circle. Ragged, irregular circle edges

indicate turbulence. Photo: Con Olsen. 
 
 
 

 
 

 Relevant Findings: 

 

 
 Node expansion levels were found 
 in the range of 15-65%, 

 relative to the controls;

 

 
 Expulsion cavity incidence found 
 to be as high as 40%; 

 none found in the controls;

 

 
 Seed weights and seedling growth 
 were reduced 

 in plants along north radius of large circle;

 

 
 Altered soil structure indicated 
 by X-ray crystallography; 

 

 
 Soil alteration simulated by 
 exposing control soil to microwaves. 

 

 
 
 Discussion 
 of Results: 

 

 When examining the summarized node-length data it should be kept 
 in mind that any set of samples that has a mean node-length change 
 greater than 15% (relative to the "normal" control plants) is statistically 
 significant. When data is statistically significant one can be confident 
 that there is a greater than 95% probability that the data are anomalous, 
 relative to the control samples. [This level of significance is 
 accepted in scientific research and in all scientific journals as 
 being meaningful.] 

 

 Figure 2 shows node-length (Nl) data from plants sampled along the 
 north and south radii in the large, 58'-diameter circle. The fact 
 that the curves produced by the data are similar in shape, but not 
 the same, indicates that the energy profiles which caused the node-length 
 changes were similar along the radii, but that the magnitudes of 
 energy delivery were quite different. This was also apparent when 
 we examined the plant nodes for the presence of expulsion cavities. 
 

 

 From past studies we know that a very rapid rate of heating will 
 cause the plant stem nodes to literally blow open to form what we 
 have termed "expulsion cavities" (see Fig. 4), an effect which is 
 apparently unique in crop formation plants (they are rarely found 
 in control plants). Expulsion cavities are more likely to be found 
 in mature plants which have less elasticity in their fibrous epidermis, 
 than in younger, less-developed plants. 

 

 When plant nodes are subjected to the heating element of the crop 
 formation energy system the moisture inside the plant node turns 
 to steam and internal pressure builds up; if this occurs at a rapid 
 rate the node tissues rupture and the pressure is relieved through 
 the formation of an expulsion cavity. When expulsion cavities are 
 present (usually in the penultimate or second node beneath the seed-head), 
 node elongation (usually in the apical, or first node beneath the 
 seed-head) is likely to be less. This occurs because, in plants 
 in which the pressure builds up to just below the critical value 
 for rupturing the expanded node tissue, the expansion continues 
 and no expulsion cavities form. 

 

 If we examine all the north radius node-length data from the large 
 circle we find (see Table 1) that the overall node expansion is 
 high, whereas the expulsion cavity level (the "safety-valve" effect) 
 is relatively low. On the other hand, the south radius data show 
 the opposite situation: that is, a low node expansion and a high 
 number of expulsion cavities. This implies that the rate of energy 
 transfer was more rapid along the south radius than along the north. 
 In other words, the rotation rate of the energy vortex was such 
 that the energy was not distributed uniformly throughout the large 
 circle. 

 

 We also found similar patterns of node-length changes and expulsion 
 cavity distribution

 (Fig. 3) in the plants taken from within the small circle. In the 
 Table 2 data we again see a tendency for the high/low, low/high 
 relationship between node elongation and expulsion cavity distributions 
 along the radii. Here, however, the north radius appears to have 
 been subjected to the higher rate of energy input, again resulting 
 in an increased number of expulsion cavities. This result simply 
 means that the organized plasmas operating within these two circle 
 regions were functioning in an independent manner. 

 

 In the past we have received anecdotal reports of visual changes 
 in the soils within crop circles; however, the Logan study if the 
 first instance in which we have been able to work directly with 
 a professional geologist (Ms. Diane Conrad, President, Meridian 
 Environmental Co., Salt Lake City, Utah). For details of Ms. Conrad's 
 investigation, see item #3 in "Details of Findings," below. 

 

 The plant node data indicate a localized, transient heating of the 
 plants. The level of this external energy input was sufficient to 
 produce significant node elongation, expulsion cavities, alterations 
 in seed weights and seedling growth. These results are consistent 
 with the concept of organized plasma vortices operating within dissipative, 
 chaotic structures as the causative agency of crop formations. 

 

 Since the energy influenced both the somatic and germinal tissues 
 of the plants, this formation must have occurred during a critical 
 interval in the development cycle of the crop.

 

 

 Details of Findings: 

 

 When received at the laboratory the individual plant stems were 
 so broken up that it was necessary to combine the apical and penultimate 
 node measurements within each of the 37 sample sets. When we could 
 not tell where on the plant stem a node came from it was discarded 
 and not included in the analyses. 

 

 From the field-sampling diagram (Fig. 1) it can be seen that there 
 are three separate sections (or sampled areas) of importance within 
 this formation, namely the larger 58 ft.-diameter circle, the smaller 
 30.4 ft.-diameter circle, and the approximately 80 ft.-long pathways 
 extending north and south of the larger circle. Accordingly, each 
 will be discussed and the results compared. 

 

 
 

 Fig. 
 1 : Field-sampling diagram [KS-03-131] 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 (1) 
 Plant Stem Node Analyses 

 

 The node lengths were 
 measured using a metal scale graduated in 0.5 mm divisions 
 and a 6X loupe. This provided a 0.1 mm precision of measurement, 
 which is adequate for these purposes. Most node changes 
 in crop formation plants are expansive in nature, and in 
 the range of 0.5 up to 1-3 mm of increased length, relative 
 to the controls. From each sample set between 10-30 notes 
 were available for analyses. In addition to node lengths, 
 each sample set was carefully examined for the presence 
 of expulsion cavities. Fig. 
 2 shows the node-length changes as a percent - change 
 relative to the mean of the controls. 

 

 

 Fig. 2 : Node-length increase along north 
 and south radii in 58 ft.-diameter circle. 

 The differences in node-length change here are thought 
 to be due not to the 

 total energy exposure but, rather, to the rate or 
 duration of the energy delivery. 

 

 It should be noted that the data points lie either on the 
 base (or at zero level) or above--that is, they are positive. 
 This means that the energy effect expanded the nodes. In 
 this and the following figures any node-length change greater 
 than 15% is statistically significant. Along the south radius 
 of the large circle only the nodes taken at 18 ft. south 
 of the center are expanded at a level of significance, whereas 
 node-sampling at 12, 18 and 24 ft. north of the center are 
 found to be elongated significantly. 

 

 The plants along the north radii of the large circle received 
 a much higher input of energy than did the plants along 
 the south radii. Further investigation reveals, however, 
 that the situation was more complex. If we look closely 
 at the frequency of expulsion cavities in relation to the 
 degree of node elongation we obtain a clearer understanding 
 of the energy distribution. Table 1 summarizes the degree 
 of node expansion and expulsion cavities along the north 
 and south radii in the 58 ft. diameter circle (mean node-length 
 change is the average of the five sampling locations shown 
 in Fig. 2); expulsion cavities were averaged within these 
 same sample groups. 

 

 
 
 Table 1: 

 Comparisons of mean node-length changes and expulsion cavities

 along north & south radii in large, 58' diameter circle. 
 

 
 
 
 

 Sample Location 

 
 
 North Radius 

 South Radius 
 
 Node Length Changes 

 
 
 +28 %

 +10 % 
 
 

 Expulsion Cavities 

 
 
 4 %

 23 % 
 
 
 
 

 Here we observe a reciprocal type of relationship between 
 the two anatomical transformations in the plant stem nodes. 
 That is, when the node elongation is high (as in the north 
 radius) the expulsion cavity level is low--and, conversely, 
 in the south radius we find low node expansion with a high 
 incidence of expulsion cavities. 

 

 We have observed exactly this same situation in previous crop 
 formations. Here, the heat input rate along the north radius 
 was insufficient to form expulsion cavities in the majority 
 of the plants; consequently, the pressure was not released 
 and a greater degree of node elongation occurred. The differences 
 in node-length increase and expulsion cavity incidence along 
 the north and south radii are not due to the total amount 
 of energy delivered but, rather, to the rate of energy delivery. 
 Thus we are apparently observing the effects of an energy 
 vortex which rotates at a different rate in its path of fixed-point 
 rotation. The node-length changes and expulsion cavity incidence 
 at sampling points in the smaller, 30 ft.-diameter, circle 
 are shown in Fig. 3. 

 

 
 Fig. 3 : Node-length increase and 
 expulsion cavity incidence in plants 

 from smaller, 30.4 ft.-diameter circle along south 
 radius [S12, S6], 

 at center [0], and along north radius [N6, N12].

 

 

 
 Table 2 :

 Comparisons of mean node-length changes and expulsion cavities

 along north & south radii in small, 30.4' diameter circle. 

 
 
 
 
 

 Sample Location 

 
 
 North Radius 

 South Radius 
 
 Node Length Changes

 
 
 +17 %

 +23 % 
 
 

 Expulsion Cavities 

 
 
 30 %

 12 % 
 
 
 
 
 

 Here we again observe the low/high, high/low relationship 
 between the node- length changes and the expulsion cavity 
 incidence. Here, however, the north radius apparently received 
 the higher rate of energy input. 

 

 Plant samples taken down the long pathways of the formation 
 also disclosed significant node length increases and expulsion 
 cavities, but the data showed no consistent patterns, such 
 as were observed in the two circles. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fig. 4 : Explusion cavities (top photo) in barley plant stems in larger 58 ft.-diameter circle, compared to controls (bottom photo) taken 108 ft. east of formation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 (2) Seed Analyses 

 

 
 
 
 Both seed weights and paper-roll 
 germinations were obtained from all of the sample sets. Seedling 
 data were recorded at 5 and 8-days germination. Analyses of 
 these data disclosed significant differences between the control 
 and formation samples. Sufficient sample sets were available 
 from the large circle to provide a statistical comparison (Table 
 3) of the seed development in the north and south radii.

 

 
 Table 3: 

 Seed weights & precision germination results in the 58'-diameter

 circle, compared with controls. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 Sample Location 
 
 Controls 
 

 North Radius 

 South Radius 

 *P 
 
 
 
 Weight Per 20 Seeds 

 ave. s.d.

 
 
 0.987 0.066

 *0.882 0.092 
 

 0.902 0.077 
 
 
 8-Day Plant

 Height 

 ave. s.d.

 
 
 15.21 0.56

 *13.95 0.92 
 

 15.17 0.44 
 
 
 

 

 No. Plants

 
 
 56 

 246 

 202 
 
 
 

 

 Here we observe that the seeds from the plants along the north 
 radius of the large circle had significantly reduced seed-weights 
 and seedling growth. Cell damage would be expected to be greatest 
 where the heating was most prolonged: referring back to Table 
 1, we see that the plants along the north radius also displayed 
 the highest degree of node expansion. Both of these findings 
 indicate that heating was more prolonged along the north radius 
 than it was along the south radius, where the energy apparently 
 popped in and out much more rapidly. 

 

 It appears, also, that this formation occurred at a time in 
 the plant development cycle when the seeds were very sensitive 
 to the external plasma energies. 
 
 
 

 

 (3) X-ray Crystallography of Soil 

 

 
 
 
 [ This section of Lab Report 
 #79 has been re-written for the BLT web-site, in consultation 
 with Diane Conrad on 5/3/03. ]

 

 "Ms. Diane Conrad, a geologist who lived near the Logan, Utah 
 crop formation in 1996, was curious as to whether there might 
 be evidence in the soils which could provide additional proof 
 of the presence of external energy at the crop circle site. 
 Having written her Master's Thesis on heat effects in clay minerals 
 (utilizing X-ray diffraction analyses [XRD]), and aware that 
 exposure to external energies can alter the crystalline structure 
 of certain clay minerals and that such changes can be determined 
 through XRD examination, she decided to carry out a preliminary 
 investigation of the Logan, Utah cropcircle soils. 

 

 A soil sample was taken from within the Logan formation, about 
 5' west of the center of the larger circle, and a control approximately 
 100' west of the edge of the larger circle. After separating 
 out the clay minerals, the XRD analyses was carried out. A graph 
 is produced by the XRD equipment, with multiple peaks, each 
 of which represent specific clay minerals in the sample being 
 tested. In expandable clays, the width of this peak is measured 
 at half-height producing a value known as the Kubler Index (KI), 
 which is an indicator of degree of crystalline structure. The 
 lower the KI, the greater the degree of crystallinity (greater 
 ordering of the crystal lattice) in that specific clay mineral. 
 

 

 The soil sample from within the crop circle showed a pronounced 
 decrease in the Kubler Index (KI) of the illite peak, as compared 
 to the control (S=0.11; C=0.25), indicating increased crystallinity 
 in the circle sample (or exposure of this sample to external 
 heat or energy). 

 

 The control sample was divided into aliquots and, in at attempt 
 to replicate the observed decrease in KI in the Logan cropcircle 
 sample, one aliquot was heated in a conventional oven for ten 
 minutes at 93 C and a second aliquot for ten minutes at 287 C. 
 A third aliquot was microwaved for two minutes on "high" to 
 determine the effects of energy of different wavelengths on 
 the crystal structure of the illite component. In the control 
 aliquots heated to 287 C and microwaved, the KI was observed 
 to decrease--with the microwaved aliquot producing a KI most 
 similar (.07) to that of the original circle sample (.11). 

 

 These results, although very preliminary, indicate an increase 
 in the ordering of the crystalline structure of the illite fraction 
 of the clays in the Logan cropcircle soil--a change indicative 
 of exposure to external energy. Additionally, the change observed 
 in the circle sample was closely approximated by exposing control 
 soil to microwave radiation." 
 
 
 

 

 Therefore, in this preliminary XRD examination of crop circle soils, 
 we have an additional indication of the presence of external energies 
 and transient heating during the crop circle formation process. 

 

 

 
 
 
 W.C. Levengood

 Pinelandia Biophysical Lab 
 
 Nancy Talbott

 Cambridge, MA 
 John 
 A. Burke

 Am-Tech Lab 
 
 
 

 Our thanks to Diane Conrad, Consulting Geologist, Meridian Environmental 
 Co., Salt Lake City, Utah. 

 
 

 
 
 
 Addendum: 

 

 Five years after the Logan formation had occurred (and after this 
 Lab Report had been written) I heard about a young man from Salt 
 Lake City who had visited the Logan circles a week or two after 
 they were discovered and had a very unusual experience. Dave Rosenfeld 
 had never seen a crop circle before and, out of curiosity, he drove 
 to the Logan site to see a crop circle for himself. Arriving at 
 about 8 pm (just as it was getting dark) he and his girlfriend went 
 into the field and were amazed to observe multiple "small white 
 lights moving about the field" both over and near the formation. 

 

 These balls of light (BOLs) were perfectly spherical, some appearing 
 to be 2-3 inches in diameter and others more the "size of a baseball." 
 They noticed that "the closer they were, the brighter they were" 
 and that "the ones farther away were not only bigger, but more transparent, 
 or not as bright." They made no sound at all. Dave reported that 
 there were "about 20 of them at a time...like a whole herd of luminous 
 bubbles dancing around the field." 

 

 When Dave or his girlfriend tried to get closer to any of the lights 
 they would disappear, or move quickly away, "always keeping about 
 3 ft. away from either one of us." The BOLs, at times, moved very 
 fast, as if "interacting with each other" and "as if they were alive," 
 never moving more than 15 ft. above the ground. The couple tried 
 to catch one of the BOLs, on one occasion attempting to "trap it 
 between us," but the BOLs just disappeared or would blink out when 
 either Dave or his girlfriend got "too close." 

 

 In another instance Dave tried to "fool" the light balls by turning 
 his back and pretending that he intended to leave the circle. After 
 walking a few feet he suddenly spun around, to see a very bright 
 light ball right behind his back. While chasing the light balls 
 Dave had the imprssion that the BOLS were "teasing us...some would 
 fly or float around us as if they were playing with us, or checking 
 us out; but if we got too close they would be gone instantly, like 
 a bubble popping." 

 

 After witnessing the light balls for awhile Dave went back to his 
 truck to get his camera and, upon his return to the field, attempted 
 to capture the BOLs in a number of photos with his Canon automatic 
 camera (Kodak 400 ASA film). 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Light ball in Logan, Utah crop circle, one of dozens of clearly visible 

"luminous bubbles" observed "dancing around the field" for at least an hour. Photo: Dave Rosenfeld 
 
 
 
 
 

 Only one photo came out, which shows a light ball about 2 yards 
 away from the camera lens and about 3 feet in the air. The BOL itself 
 was, according to Dave, perfectly spherical. The blurred streak 
 behind the BOL on the photo was not visible to the eye, although 
 Dave noted that the light balls which were close to him did seem 
 to react to the flash going off, and would "jerk" or make a quick 
 movement away. 

 

 After an hour or more in the formation, the light balls "slowly 
 left us, blinking out a few at a time, or moving off in the distance 
 and fading out." Both Dave and his girlfriend had had a feeling 
 of playfulness throughout the encounter, as well as the distinct 
 impression of communication of some sort having taken place. For 
 Dave's full account click here . 
 

 

 This is the first account we know of in which witnesses both observed 
 visually and interacted over an extended period of time with light 
 balls in a crop formation--and obtained photographic evidence of 
 the experience. This report also supports other accounts of BOLs 
 and/or strange energy effects experienced in or near crop circles, 
 sometimes long after the crop circle formed. 

 

 Nancy Talbott

 5/03 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Help Support the Research with a 

Tax-Deductible Donation 

 
 
 
 [ Home ] [ USA Crop Circle List ] [ Updates ] [ Plant 
 Abnormalities ] [ Magnetic 
 Material in Soils ]

 [ Clay-Mineral XRD Study ]
 [ Van den Broeke Case ] [ Other 
 Facts ] [ Published 
 Papers ] [ Professional Consultants ]

 [ Eyewitness Reports ] [ Field 
 Reports ] [ BLT History ] [ Lab 
 Reports ] [ Research Links ] [ General 
 Links ] [ Contact ] 
 

 

 
 Report a Crop Circle